This is a nightly snapshot of the Guile Tcl/Tk interface.  This module
allows you to use the Tcl programming language, and more
interestingly, the Tk user interface toolkit, from Guile.

Please send bug reports to bug-guile@prep.ai.mit.edu.


Important Facts About Snapshots ======================================

Please keep in mind that these sources are strictly experimental; they
will usually not be well-tested, and may not even compile on some
systems.  They may contain interfaces which will change.  They will
usually not be of sufficient quality for use by people not comfortable
hacking the innards of Guile.  Caveat!

However, we're providing them anyway for several reasons.  We'd like
to encourage people to get involved in developing Guile.  People
willing to use the bleeding edge of development can get earlier access
to new, experimental features.  Patches submitted relative to recent
snapshots will be easier for us to evaluate and install, since the
patch's original sources will be closer to what we're working with.
And it allows us to start testing features earlier.

Nightly snapshots of the Guile Tcl/Tk interface development sources
are available via anonymous FTP from ftp.cyclic.com, in
/pub/guile/guile-tcltk-snap.tar.gz.

Via the web, that's:  ftp://ftp.cyclic.com/pub/guile/guile-tcltk-snap.tar.gz
For getit, that's:    ftp.cyclic.com:/pub/guile/guile-tcltk-snap.tar.gz


The latest official Guile release is available via anonymous FTP from
prep.ai.mit.edu, as /pub/gnu/guile-1.0.tar.gz.

Via the web, that's:  ftp://prep.ai.mit.edu/pub/gnu/guile-1.0.tar.gz
For getit, that's:    prep.ai.mit.edu:/pub/gnu/guile-1.0.tar.gz

The mailing list `guile@cygnus.com' carries discussions, questions,
and often answers, about Guile and associated packages.  To subscribe,
send mail to guile-request@cygnus.com.  Of course, please send bug
reports (and fixes!) to bug-guile@prep.ai.mit.edu.



About This Distribution ==============================================

To build this package (the Guile Tcl/Tk interface), you must have
already built installed the Guile core.  Building and installing this
distribution gives you:

guile-tcltk --- a stand-alone interpreter for Guile with the Tcl/Tk
	interface linked in, usually installed in /usr/local/bin.
	With no arguments, this is a simple interactive Scheme
	interpreter with access to Tcl and Tk.  It can also be used as
	an interpreter for script files; see the Guile core NEWS file
	for details.
libgtcltk.a --- an object library containing the Guile Tcl/Tk interface,
	usually installed in /usr/local/lib.  You can use the
	interface in your own programs by linking against this
	library, and -lguile.


Interesting files include:
- COPYING, which describes the terms under which you may redistribute
  Guile, and explains that there is no warranty.


Hacking It Yourself ==================================================

As distributed, the Guile Tcl/Tk interface needs only an installed
version of Tcl/Tk, an ANSI C compiler and a Unix system to compile.
However, guile-tcltk's makefiles, configuration scripts, and a few
other files are automatically generated, not written by hand.  If you
want to make changes to the system (which we encourage!) you will find
it helpful to have the tools we use to develop Guile.  They are the
following:

Autoconf 2.12 --- a system for automatically generating `configure'
	scripts from templates which list the non-portable features a
	program would like to use.  Available in
	"ftp://prep.ai.mit.edu/pub/gnu".

Automake 1.1p --- a system for automatically generating Makefiles that
	conform to the (rather Byzantine) GNU coding standards.  The
	nice thing is that it takes care of hairy targets like 'make
	dist' and 'make distclean', and automatically generates
	Makefile dependencies.  Available in
	"ftp://ftp.cygnus.com/pub/tromey".

libtool 0.9d --- a system for managing the zillion hairy options needed
	on various systems to produce shared libraries.  Available in
	"ftp://alpha.gnu.ai.mit.edu/gnu".

You are lost in a little maze of automatically generated files, all
different.
> 


Authors And Contributors =============================================

Many people have generously contributed to Guile.  However, any errors
are the responsibility of the primary Guile maintainer, Jim Blandy.

Tom Lord wrote the Guile/Tcl/Tk interface, among many other things.
