@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Guile is an interpreter for the Scheme programming language, packaged
for use in a wide variety of applications.  Guile implements Scheme as
described in the Revised^4 Report on the Algorithmic Language Scheme
(usually known as R4RS), providing clean and general data and control
structures.  Guile goes beyond the rather austere language presented in
R4RS, extending it with a module system, full access to POSIX system
calls, networking support, multiple threads, dynamic linking, a foreign
function call interface, powerful string processing, and many other
features needed for programming in the real world.

Like a shell, Guile can run interactively, reading expressions from the
user, evaluating them, and displaying the results, or as a script
interpreter, reading and executing Scheme code from a file.  However,
Guile is also packaged as an object library, allowing other applications
to incorporate the full power of the Scheme programming language.  An
application can use Guile as an extension language, a clean and powerful
configuration language, or as multi-purpose ``glue'', connecting
primitives provided by the application.  It is easy to call Scheme code
from C code and vice versa, giving the application designer full control
of how and when to invoke the interpreter.  Applications can add new
functions, data types, control structures, and even syntax to Guile,
creating a domain-specific language tailored to the task at hand, but
based on a robust language design.

Guile's module system allows one to break up a large program into
manageable sections with well-defined interfaces between them.  Modules
may contain a mixture of interpreted and compiled code; Guile can use
either static or dynamic linking to incorporate compiled code.  Modules
also encourage developers to package up useful collections of routines
for general distribution; as of this writing, one can find Emacs
interfaces, database access routines, compilers, GUI toolkit interfaces,
and HTTP client functions, among others.

In the future, we hope to expand Guile to support other languages like
Tcl and Perl by compiling them to Scheme code.  This means that, if an
application uses Guile as its extension language, users can extend it in
the language of their choice, rather than having the tastes of the
application's author imposed on them.

This manual assumes you know Scheme, as described in R4RS.  From there,
it describes:
@table @b

@item Part I
how to use Guile interactively and as an interpreter, how to link Guile
into your own applications, and how to write modules of interpreted and
compiled code for use with Guile,

@item Part II
Guile's extensions to the language described in R4RS,

@item Part III
how to call Guile from C code, and how to add new functions written in C
to Guile, using C functions which (we hope) will also someday work with
other Scheme interpreters, allowing you to write C code which will work
with any of several Scheme systems, and

@item Part IV
further functions available to the C level which are specific to Guile,
but provide more thorough access to Guile's internals.

@end table

Finally, the appendices explain how to obtain the latest version of
Guile, how to install it, where to find modules to work with Guile, and
how to use the Guile debugger.


@node Running Guile Interactively
@chapter Running Guile Interactively

In its simplest form, Guile acts as an interactive interpreter for the
Scheme programming language, reading and evaluating Scheme expressions
the user enters from the terminal.  Here is a sample interaction between
Guile and a user; the user's input appears after the @code{$} and
@code{guile>} prompts:

@example
$ guile
guile> (+ 1 2 3)                ; add some numbers
6
guile> (define (factorial n)    ; define a function
         (if (zero? n) 1 (* n (factorial (- n 1)))))
guile> (factorial 20)
2432902008176640000
guile> (getpwnam "jimb")        ; find my entry in /etc/passwd
#("jimb" ".0krIpK2VqNbU" 4008 10 "Jim Blandy" "/u/jimb"
  "/usr/local/bin/bash")
guile> @kbd{C-d}
$
@end example


@node Guile Scripts
@chapter Guile Scripts

Like AWK, Perl, or any shell, Guile can interpret script files.  A Guile
script is simply a file of Scheme code with some extra information at
the beginning which tells the operating system how to invoke Guile, and
then tells Guile how to handle the Scheme code.

Before we go into details, here is a trivial Guile script:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile -s
!#
(display "Hello, world!")
(newline)
@end example

@menu
* The Top of a script file::    How to start a Guile script.
* Invoking Guile::              The arguments Guile takes, in detail.
* The Meta Switch::             Passing complex argument lists to Guile
                                from shell scripts.
* Scripting Examples::          Simple Guile scripts, explained.
@end menu

@node The Top of a script file
@section The Top of a script file

The first line of a Guile script must tell the operating system to use
Guile to evaluate the script, and then tell Guile how to go about doing
that.  Here is the simplest case:
@itemize @bullet

@item
The first two characters of the file must be @samp{#!}.

The operating system interprets this as a sign that the rest of the line
is the name of an executable that can interpret the script; Guile
interprets these characters as the beginning of a multi-line comment,
terminated by the characters @samp{!#} on a line by themselves.  (This
is an extension to the syntax described in R4RS, added to support shell
scripts.)

@item
Next, on the same line, must come the full pathname to the Guile
interpreter.  On most systems, this would be
@samp{/usr/local/bin/guile}.

@item
Then must come a space, followed by a command-line argument to pass to
Guile; this should be @samp{-s}.  This switch tells Guile to run a
script, instead of soliciting the user for input from the terminal.
There are more elaborate things to do here; see @ref{The Meta Switch}

@item
Follow this with a newline.

@item
The second line of the script should contain only the characters
@samp{!#} --- just like the top of the file, but reversed.  The
operating system never reads this far, but Guile treats this as the end
of the comment begun on the first line by the @samp{#!} characters.

@item
The rest of the file should be a series of arbitrary Scheme definitions
and expressions.

@end itemize

Guile evaluates the definitions and expressions in the order they
appear.  Upon reaching the end of the file, Guile exits.

The function @code{command-line} returns the name of the script file and
any command-line arguments passed by the user, as a list of strings.

For example, consider the following script file:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile -s
!#
(write (command-line))
(newline)
@end example

If you put that text in a file called @file{foo} in the current
directory, then you could make it executable and try it out like this:
@example
$ chmod a+x foo
$ ./foo
("./foo")
$ ./foo bar baz
("./foo" "bar" "baz")
$ 
@end example

As another example, here is a simple replacement for the POSIX
@code{echo} command:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile -s
!#
(for-each (lambda (s) (display s) (display " "))
  (cdr (command-line)))
(newline)
@end example


@node Invoking Guile
@section Invoking Guile

Guile processes its command-line arguments from left to right,
recognizing the switches described below.  For examples, see
@ref{Scripting Examples}.

@table @code

@item -s @var{script} @var{arg...}
Read and evaluate Scheme source code from the file @var{script}, as the
@code{load} function would.  After loading @var{script}, exit.  Any
command-line arguments @var{arg...} following @var{script} become the
script's arguments; the @code{command-line} function returns a list of
strings of the form @code{(@var{script} @var{arg...})}.

@item -c @var{expr} @var{arg...}
Evaluate @var{expr} as Scheme code, and then exit.  Any command-line
arguments @var{arg...} following @var{expr} become command-line arguments; the
@code{command-line} function returns a list of strings of the form
@code{(@var{guile} @var{arg...})}, where @var{guile} is the path of the
Guile executable.

@item -- @var{arg...}
Run interactively, prompting the user for expressions and evaluating
them.  Any command-line arguments @var{arg...} following the @code{--}
become command-line arguments for the interactive session; the
@code{command-line} function returns a list of strings of the form
@code{(@var{guile} @var{arg...})}, where @var{guile} is the path of the
Guile executable.

@item -l @var{file}
Load Scheme source code from @var{file}, and continue processing the
command line.

@item -e @var{function}
Make @var{function} the @dfn{entry point} of the script.  After loading
the script file (with @code{-s}) or evaluating the expression (with
@code{-e}), apply @var{function} to a list containing the program name
and the command-line arguments --- the list provided by the
@code{command-line} function.

A @code{-e} switch can appear anywhere in the argument list, but Guile
always invokes the @var{function} as the @emph{last} action it performs.
This is weird, but because of the way script invocation works under
POSIX, the @code{-s} option must always come last in the list.

@xref{Scripting Examples}.

@item -ds
Treat a final @code{-s} option as if it occurred at this point in the
command line; load the script here.

This switch is necessary because, although the POSIX script invocation
mechanism effectively requires the @code{-s} option to appear last, the
programmer may well want to run the script before other actions
requested on the command line.  For examples, see @ref{Scripting
Examples}.

@item \
Read more command-line arguments, starting from the second line of the
script file.  @xref{The Meta Switch}.

@item --emacs
Assume Guile is running as an inferior process of Emacs, and use a
special protocol to communicate with Emacs's Guile interaction mode.
This switch sets the global variable use-emacs-interface to @code{#t}.

This switch is still experimental.

@item -h@r{, }--help
Display help on invoking Guile, and then exit.

@item -v@r{, }--version
Display the current version of Guile, and then exit.

@end table


@node The Meta Switch
@section The Meta Switch

Guile's command-line switches allow the programmer to describe
reasonably complicated actions in scripts.  Unfortunately, the POSIX
script invocation mechanism only allows one argument to appear on the
@samp{#!} line after the path to the Guile executable.  Suppose you
wrote a script starting like this:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile -e main -s
!#
(define (main args)
	(map (lambda (arg) (display arg) (display " "))
	     (cdr args))
	(newline))
@end example
The intended meaning is clear: load the file, and then call @code{main}
on the command-line arguments.  However, the system will treat
everything after the Guile path as a single argument --- the string
@code{"-e main -s"} --- which is not what we want.

As a workaround, the meta switch @code{\} allows the Guile programmer to
specify an arbitrary number of options without patching the kernel.  If
the first argument to a Guile script is @code{\}, Guile will open the
script file, parse arguments starting from the file's second line
(according to rules described below), and substitute them for the
@code{\} switch.

Working in concert with the meta switch, Guile treats the characters
@samp{#!} as the beginning of a comment which extends through the next
line containing only the characters @samp{!#}.  This sort of comment may
appear anywhere in a Guile program, but it is most useful at the top of
a file, meshing magically with the POSIX script invocation mechanism.

Thus, consider a script named @file{/u/jimb/ekko} which starts like this:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile \
-e main -s
!#
(define (main args)
	(map (lambda (arg) (display arg) (display " "))
	     (cdr args))
	(newline))
@end example

Suppose a user invokes this script as follows:
@example
$ /u/jimb/ekko a b c
@end example

Here's what happens:
@itemize @bullet

@item
the operating system recognizes the @samp{#!} token at the top of the
file, and rewrites the command line to:
@example
/usr/local/bin/guile \ /u/jimb/ekko a b c
@end example
This is the usual behavior, prescribed by POSIX.

@item
When Guile sees the first two arguments, @code{\ /u/jimb/ekko}, it opens
@file{/u/jimb/ekko}, parses the three arguments @code{-e}, @code{main},
and @code{-s} from it, and substitutes them for the @code{\} switch.
Thus, Guile's command line now reads:
@example
/usr/local/bin/guile -e main -s /u/jimb/ekko a b c
@end example

@item
Guile then processes these switches: it loads @file{/u/jimb/ekko} as a
file of Scheme code (treating the first three lines as a comment), and
then performs the application @code{(main "/u/jimb/ekko" "a" "b" "c")}.

@end itemize


When Guile sees the meta switch @code{\}, it parses command-line
argument from the script file according to the following rules:
@itemize @bullet

@item
Each space character terminates an argument.  This means that two
spaces in a row introduce an argument @code{""}.

@item
The tab character is not permitted (unless you quote it with the
backslash character, as described below), to avoid confusion.

@item
The newline character terminates the sequence of arguments, and will
also terminate a final non-empty argument.  (However, a newline
following a space will not introduce a final empty-string argument;
it only terminates the argument list.)

@item
The backslash character is the escape character.  It escapes backslash,
space, tab, and newline.  The ANSI C escape sequences like @code{\n} and
@code{\t} are also supported.  These produce argument constituents; the
two-character combination @code{\n} doesn't act like a terminating
newline.  The escape sequence @code{\@var{NNN}} for exactly three octal
digits reads as the character whose ASCII code is @var{NNN}.  As above,
characters produced this way are argument constituents.  Backslash
followed by other characters is not allowed.

@end itemize


@node Scripting Examples
@section Scripting Examples

To start with, here are some examples of invoking Guile directly:

@table @code

@item guile -- a b c
Run Guile interactively; @code{(command-line)} will return
@code{("/usr/local/bin/guile" "a" "b" "c")}.

@item guile -s /u/jimb/ex2 a b c
Load the file @file{/u/jimb/ex2}; @code{(command-line)} will return
@code{("/u/jimb/ex2" "a" "b" "c")}.

@item guile -c '(write %load-path) (newline)'
Write the value of the variable @code{%load-path}, print a newline,
and exit.

@item guile -e main -s /u/jimb/ex4 foo
Load the file @file{/u/jimb/ex4}, and then call the function
@code{main}, passing it the list @code{("/u/jimb/ex4" "foo")}.

@item guile -l first -ds -l last -s script
Load the files @file{first}, @file{script}, and @file{last}, in that
order.  The @code{-ds} switch says when to process the @code{-s}
switch.  For a more motivated example, see the scripts below.

@end table


Here is a very simple Guile script:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile -s
!#
(display "Hello, world!")
(newline)
@end example
The first line marks the file as a Guile script.  When the user invokes
it, the system runs @file{/usr/local/bin/guile} to interpret the script,
passing @code{-s}, the script's filename, and any arguments given to the
script as command-line arguments.  When Guile sees @code{-s
@var{script}}, it loads @var{script}.  Thus, running this program
produces the output:
@example
Hello, world!
@end example

Here is a script which prints the factorial of its argument:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile -s
!#
(define (fact n)
  (if (zero? n) 1
    (* n (fact (- n 1)))))

(display (fact (string->number (cadr (command-line)))))
(newline)
@end example
In action:
@example
$ fact 5
120
$
@end example

However, suppose we want to use the definition of @code{fact} in this
file from another script.  We can't simply @code{load} the script file,
and then use @code{fact}'s definition, because the script will try to
compute and display a factorial when we load it.  To avoid this problem,
we might write the script this way:

@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile \
-e main -s
!#
(define (fact n)
  (if (zero? n) 1
    (* n (fact (- n 1)))))

(define (main args)
  (display (fact (string->number (cadr args))))
  (newline))
@end example
This version packages the actions the script should perform in a
function, @code{main}.  This allows us to load the file purely for its
definitions, without any extraneous computation taking place.  Then we
used the meta switch @code{\} and the entry point switch @code{-e} to
tell Guile to call @code{main} after loading the script.
@example
$ fact 50
30414093201713378043612608166064768844377641568960512000000000000
@end example

Suppose that we now want to write a script which computes the
@code{choose} function: given a set of @var{m} distinct objects,
@code{(choose @var{n} @var{m})} is the number of distinct subsets
containing @var{n} objects each.  It's easy to write @code{choose} given
@code{fact}, so we might write the script this way:
@example
#!/usr/local/bin/guile \
-l fact -e main -s
!#
(define (choose n m)
  (/ (fact m) (* (fact (- m n)) (fact n))))

(define (main args)
  (let ((n (string->number (cadr args)))
        (m (string->number (caddr args))))
    (display (choose n m))
    (newline)))
@end example

The command-line arguments here tell Guile to first load the file
@file{fact}, and then run the script, with @code{main} as the entry
point.  In other words, the @code{choose} script can use definitions
made in the @code{fact} script.  Here are some sample runs:
@example
$ choose 0 4
1
$ choose 1 4
4
$ choose 2 4
6
$ choose 3 4
4
$ choose 4 4
1
$ choose 50 100
100891344545564193334812497256
@end example


@node Linking Programs With Guile
@chapter Linking Programs With Guile

The Guile interpreter is available as an object library, to be linked
into applications using Scheme as a configuration or extension
language.  This chapter covers the mechanics of linking your program
with Guile on a typical POSIX system.

Parts III and IV of this manual describe the C functions Guile provides
(see @ref{Part III: Using Scheme with C --- a Portable Interface}, and
@ref{Part IV: Using Scheme with C --- Guile's Interface}).  Furthermore,
any Scheme function described in this manual as a ``Primitive'' is also
callable from C; see @ref{Relationship between Scheme and C functions}.

The header file @code{<libguile.h>} provides declarations for all of
Guile's functions and constants.  You should @code{#include} it at the
head of any C source file that uses identifiers described in this
manual.

Once you've compiled your source files, you can link them against Guile
by passing the flag @code{-lguile} to your linker.  If you installed
Guile with multi-thread support (by passing @code{--enable-threads} to
the @code{configure} script), you may also need to link against the
QuickThreads library, @code{-lqt}.

@menu
* Guile Initialization Functions::  What to call first.
* Example: The Guile Main Program:: Sources and makefiles.
@end menu

@node Guile Initialization Functions
@section Guile Initialization Functions

To initialize Guile, use this function:

@deftypefun void scm_boot_guile (int @var{argc}, char **@var{argv}, void (*@var{main_func}) (), void *@var{closure})
Initialize the Guile Scheme interpreter.  Then call @var{main_func},
passing it @var{closure}, @var{argc}, and @var{argv}.  @var{main_func}
should do all the work of the program (initializing other packages,
defining application-specific functions, reading user input, and so on)
before returning.  When @var{main_func} returns, call @code{exit (0)};
@code{scm_boot_guile} never returns.  If you want some other exit value,
have @var{main_func} call exit itself.

@code{scm_boot_guile} arranges for the Scheme @code{command-line}
function to return the strings given by @var{argc} and @var{argv}.  If
@var{main_func} modifies @var{argc} or @var{argv}, it should call
@code{scm_set_program_arguments} with the final list, so Scheme code
will know which arguments have been processed.

@code{scm_boot_guile} establishes a catch-all error handler which prints
an error message and exits the process.  This means that Guile exits in
a coherent way if a system error occurs and the user isn't prepared to
handle it.  If the user doesn't like this behavior, they can establish
their own universal catcher in @var{main_func} to shadow this one.

Why must the caller do all the real work from @var{main_func}?  Guile's
garbage collector assumes that all local variables which reference
Scheme objects will be above @code{scm_boot_guile}'s stack frame on the
stack.  If you try to manipulate Scheme objects after this function
returns, it's the luck of the draw whether Guile's storage manager will
be able to find the objects you allocate.  So, @code{scm_boot_guile}
function exits, rather than returning, to discourage you from making
that mistake.
@end deftypefun

One common way to use Guile is to write a set of C functions which
perform some useful task, make them callable from Scheme, and then link
the program with Guile, producing a Scheme interpreter just like
@code{guile}, but augmented with extra functions for some specific
application --- a special-purpose scripting language.

In this situation, the application should probably process its
command-line arguments in the same manner as the stock Guile
interpreter.  To make that straightforward, Guile provides this
function:

@deftypefun void scm_shell (int @var{argc}, char **@var{argv})
Process command-line arguments in the manner of the @code{guile}
executable.  This includes loading the normal Guile initialization
files, interacting with the user or running any scripts or expressions
specified by @code{-s} or @code{-e} options, and then exiting.
@xref{Invoking Guile}, for more details.

Since this function typically does not return, you should do all
application-specific initialization before calling this function.

If you do not use this function to start Guile, you are responsible for
making sure Guile's usual initialization files, @file{init.scm} and
@file{ice-9/boot-9.scm}, get loaded.  This will change in a future
version of Guile.
@end deftypefun


@node Example: The Guile Main Program
@section Example: The Guile Main Program

Here is @file{simple-guile.c}, source code for a @code{main} and an
@code{inner_main} function that will produce a complete Guile
interpreter.

@example
/* simple-guile.c --- how to start up the Guile
   interpreter from C code.  */

/* Get declarations for all the scm_ functions.  */
#include <libguile.h>

static void
inner_main (void *closure, int argc, char **argv)
@{
  /* module initializations would go here */
  scm_shell (argc, argv);
@}

int
main (int argc, char **argv)
@{
  scm_boot_guile (argc, argv, inner_main, 0);
  return 0; /* never reached */
@}
@end example

The @code{main} function calls @code{scm_boot_guile} to initialize
Guile, passing it @code{inner_main}.  Once @code{scm_boot_guile} is
ready, it invokes @code{inner_main}, which calls @code{scm_shell} to
process the command-line arguments in the usual way.

Here is a Makefile which you can use to compile the above program.
@example
# Use GCC, if you have it installed.
CC=gcc

# Tell the C compiler where to find <libguile.h> and -lguile.
CFLAGS=-I/usr/local/include -L/usr/local/lib

# Include -lqt and -lrx if they are present on your system.
LIBS=-lguile -lqt -lrx -lm

simple-guile: simple-guile.o
	${CC} ${CFLAGS} simple-guile.o ${LIBS} -o simple-guile
simple-guile.o: simple-guile.c
	${CC} -c ${CFLAGS} simple-guile.c
@end example

If you are using the GNU Autoconf package to make your application more
portable, Autoconf will settle many of the details in the Makefile above
automatically, making it much simpler and more portable; we recommend
using Autoconf with Guile.  Here is a @file{configure.in} file for
@code{simple-guile}, which Autoconf can use as a template to generate a
@code{configure} script:
@example
AC_INIT(simple-guile.c)

# Find a C compiler.
AC_PROG_CC

# Check for libraries.
AC_CHECK_LIB(m, sin)
AC_CHECK_LIB(rx, regcomp)
AC_CHECK_LIB(qt, main)
AC_CHECK_LIB(guile, scm_boot_guile)

# Generate a Makefile, based on the results.
AC_OUTPUT(Makefile)
@end example

Here is a @code{Makefile.in} template, from which the @code{configure}
script produces a Makefile customized for the host system:
@example
# The configure script fills in these values.
CC=@CC@
CFLAGS=@CFLAGS@
LIBS=@LIBS@

simple-guile: simple-guile.o
	${CC} ${CFLAGS} simple-guile.o ${LIBS} -o simple-guile
simple-guile.o: simple-guile.c
	${CC} -c ${CFLAGS} simple-guile.c
@end example

The developer should use Autoconf to generate the @file{configure}
script from the @file{configure.in} template, and distribute
@file{configure} with the application.  Here's how a user might go about
building the application:

@example
$ ls
Makefile.in     configure*      configure.in    simple-guile.c
$ ./configure
creating cache ./config.cache
checking for gcc... gcc
checking whether the C compiler (gcc  ) works... yes
checking whether the C compiler (gcc  ) is a cross-compiler... no
checking whether we are using GNU C... yes
checking whether gcc accepts -g... yes
checking for sin in -lm... yes
checking for regcomp in -lrx... yes
checking for main in -lqt... yes
checking for scm_boot_guile in -lguile... yes
updating cache ./config.cache
creating ./config.status
creating Makefile
$ make
gcc -c -g -O2 simple-guile.c
gcc -g -O2 simple-guile.o -lguile -lqt -lrx -lm  -o simple-guile
$ ./simple-guile
guile> (+ 1 2 3)
6
guile> (getpwnam "jimb")
#("jimb" "83Z7d75W2tyJQ" 4008 10 "Jim Blandy" "/u/jimb"
  "/usr/local/bin/bash")
guile> (exit)
$ 
@end example


@node Writing Guile Modules
@chapter Writing Guile Modules

